.TH DBFILTER-CIDR 1 "November 2014" "db Manual" "db Manual"

.SH NAME
dbfilter-cidr \- Filter db data records based on their IPv4 address fields

.SH SYNOPSIS
<data> | \fBdbfilter-cidr\fR [\fIOPTION\fR]... FILTER_FILE

.SH SUMMARY
\fBdbfilter-cidr\fR filters db data records read from stdin based on include
and exclude rules specified in the \fIFILTER_FILE\fR. To be included in the
output, records must match at least one include rule (unless there are no
include rules) and must not match any exclude rules. Records that pass the
filter are printed to stdout.

.SH FILTER SYNTAX
The \fIFILTER_FILE\fR should contain a list of rules with the following syntax:
.P
[+|-]\fICIDR\fR \fICOLUMN\fR[,\fICOLUMN\fR]...
.P
\(lq+\(rq denotes an include rule and \(lq-\(rq denotes an exclude rule. Lines
beginning with \(lq#\(rq are ignored.

.SH FILTER EXAMPLES
.P
.B +192.168.0.0/16 src,dst

Include a record if the IPv4 address in both the \(lqsrc\(rq and \(lqdst\(rq
columns belongs to the 192.168.0.0/16 class B network.

.P
.B -192.168.15.0/24 src,dst

Exclude a record if the IPv4 address in either the \(lqsrc\(rq or \(lqdst\(rq
column belongs to the 192.168.15.0/24 class C network.

.P
.B -192.168.1.1 src,dst

Exclude a record if the IPv4 address in either the \(lqsrc\(rq or \(lqdst\(rq
column is \(lq192.168.1.1\(rq.

.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
\fBFILTER_FILE\fR
Specify the path of a filter file.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
Output usage and exit.

.SH EXAMPLES
.P
.B dbfilter-cidr filter.txt

Read records from stdin and filter them using the filter rules in
\(lqfilter.txt\(rq.

.SH AUTHOR
Written by Curt Hash.
