.TH DBSORT 1 "September 2014" "db Manual" "db Manual"

.SH NAME
dbsort \- Sort db records using *nix sort

.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBdbsort\fR [\fIOPTION\fR]... --files-from \fIPATH\fR -- [\fISORT_ARGS\fR]
.br
\fBdbsort\fR [\fIOPTION\fR]... -- \fIPATH\fR [\fIPATH\fR]... [\fISORT_ARGS\fR]
.br
\fBdbsort\fR [\fIOPTION\fR]... -- [\fISORT_ARGS\fR]

.SH SUMMARY
\fBdbsort\fR uses *nix sort to sort db data records. Input data files can be
read from a file, provided as arguments or db data records can be piped
directly to stdin. Input data files can be uncompressed, gzip compressed data,
bzip2 compressed data or 7-zip archive data. Sorted db data records are written
to stdout.

.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
\fBSORT_ARGS\fR
Additional options to sort. For example, \fB--parallel\fR=\fIINTEGER\fR. See
sort(1).
.TP
\fBPATH\fR
Specify the path of a file to sort. Note that files specified on the command
line must follow the double dash (--) like \fBSORT_ARGS\fR.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
Output usage and exit.
.TP
\fB\-k\fR, \fB\-\-key\fR \fICOLNAME[+[OPTIONS]]\fR
Sort by \fICOLNAME\fR. Additional column sort \fIOPTIONS\fR (e.g., \(lqr\(rq
for reverse) can be specified using a plus followed by the option letter(s).
There is no need to specify numeric sort options like \(lqg\(rq and \(lqn\(rq;
these options are added automatically based on the column type. This option can
be used multiple times to sort by multiple columns. See sort(1).
.TP
\fB\-\-files-from\fR \fIPATH\fR
Read a list of input files from \fIPATH\fR. If \fIPATH\fR is equal to
\(lq-\(rq, the list of input files will be read from stdin.

.SH EXAMPLES
.P
.B dbsort

Read records from stdin and sort them.

.P
.B echo -e \(dqfoo.gz\\\\nbar.gz\(dq | dbsort --files-from -
.br
.B dbsort -- foo.gz bar.gz

Uncompress and sort the contents of \(lqfoo.gz\(rq and \(lqbar.gz\(rq.

.P
.B dbsort --files-from sort_files.txt

Sort the contents of the files listed in \(lqsort_files.txt\(rq.

.P
.B dbsort -k ip

Sort records by the \fBip\fR column.

.P
.B dbsort -k ip+r

Sort records by the \fBip\fR column in reverse order.

.P
.B dbsort -k sip -k dip

Sort records by the \fBsip\fR and \fBdip\fR columns.

.P
.B dbsort -k ip -- -s --parallel=48 -S48G

Sort records by the \fBip\fR column. Additionally, stabilize the sort, run 48
sorts concurrently and use up to 48 gigabytes of main memory.

.SH SEE ALSO
sort(1), jsonsort(1)

.SH AUTHOR
Written by Curt Hash.
