.TH DBSPLIT 1 "November 2014" "db Manual" "db Manual"

.SH NAME
dbsplit \- Split a db record stream into multiple output files

.SH SYNOPSIS
<data> | \fBdbsplit\fR [\fIOPTION\fR]... [\fIPATH\fR x N]

.SH SUMMARY
\fBdbsplit\fR splits or partitions input data records read from stdin into
multiple output files.

.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
\fBPATH\fR
Specify the path of each output file manually. This is only valid if the
\fB\-u\fR (\fB\-\-uniq\fR) option is not set.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
Output usage and exit.
.TP
\fB\-n\fR, \fB\-\-parts\fR \fIN\fR
Generate \fIN\fR output files.
.TP
\fB\-k\fR, \fB\-\-key\fR \fICOLNAME[,COLNAME]...\fR
Specify a list of columns to partition on. The values of the columns will be
hashed and mapped to an output file.
.TP
\fB\-s\fR, \fB\-\-set\fR
Treat the columns specified with \fB\-\-key\fR as a set (i.e., unordered). In
other words, the same set of column values will map to the same output file,
regardless of order.
.TP
\fB\-p\fR, \fB\-\-prefix\fR \fIPREFIX\fR
Output file names will be prefixed with \fIPREFIX\fR. This option is ignored if
the output file paths are supplied as arguments.
.TP
\fB\-u\fR, \fB\-\-uniq\fR
Each unique record or list/set of column values will be mapped to a unique
output file. This option is incompatible with the \fB\-n\fR (\fB\-\-parts\fR)
option, because the number of output files is determined by the number of
unique values in the input data.

.SH EXAMPLES
.P
.B dbsplit -n 10

Round-robin split the input data stream into 10 output files.

.P
.B dbsplit -k sip,dip -n 10

Partition the input data into 10 output files such that all records with the
same values for the \(lqsip\(rq and \(lqdip\(rq columns are written to the same
output file.

.P
.B dbsplit -k sip,dip -n 10 -s

Partition the input data into 10 output files such that all records with the
same \fBset\fR of values for the \(lqsip\(rq and \(lqdip\(rq columns are
written to the same output file.

.P
.B dbsplit -k sip -u

Split the input data into output files such that each unique value of
\(lqsip\(rq is in its own output file.

.SH SEE ALSO
jsonsplit(1)

.SH AUTHOR
Written by Curt Hash.
