.TH JSONSPLIT 1 "November 2014" "db Manual" "db Manual"

.SH NAME
jsonsplit \- Split a JSON record stream into multiple output files

.SH SYNOPSIS
<data> | \fBjsonsplit\fR [\fIOPTION\fR]... [\fIPATH\fR x N]

.SH SUMMARY
\fBjsonsplit\fR splits or partitions input data records read from stdin into
multiple output files.

.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
\fBPATH\fR
Specify the path of each output file manually. This is only valid if the
\fB\-u\fR (\fB\-\-uniq\fR) option is not set.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
Output usage and exit.
.TP
\fB\-n\fR, \fB\-\-parts\fR \fIN\fR
Generate \fIN\fR output files.
.TP
\fB\-k\fR, \fB\-\-key\fR \fIJSONPATH\fR
Specify a JSONPath expression to partition on. The value of \fIJSONPATH\fR will
be hashed and mapped to an output file. This option can be used multiple times
to partition by multiple values.
.TP
\fB\-s\fR, \fB\-\-set\fR
Treat the values specified with \fB\-\-key\fR as a set (i.e., unordered). In
other words, the same set of values will map to the same output file,
regardless of order.
.TP
\fB\-p\fR, \fB\-\-prefix\fR \fIPREFIX\fR
Output file names will be prefixed with \fIPREFIX\fR. This option is ignored if
the output file paths are supplied as arguments.
.TP
\fB\-u\fR, \fB\-\-uniq\fR
Each unique record or list/set of values will be mapped to a unique output
file. This option is incompatible with the \fB\-n\fR (\fB\-\-parts\fR) option,
because the number of output files is determined by the number of unique values
in the input data.

.SH EXAMPLES
.P
.B jsonsplit -n 10

Round-robin split the input data stream into 10 output files.

.P
.B jsonsplit -k $.sip -k $.dip -n 10

Partition the input data into 10 output files such that all records with the
same values for the top-level \(lqsip\(rq and \(lqdip\(rq fields are written to
the same output file.

.P
.B jsonsplit -k $.sip -k $.dip -n 10 -s

Partition the input data into 10 output files such that all records with the
same \fBset\fR of values for the top-level \(lqsip\(rq and \(lqdip\(rq fields
are written to the same output file.

.P
.B jsonsplit -k $.sip -u

Split the input data into output files such that each unique value of the
top-level \(lqsip\(rq field is in its own output file.

.SH SEE ALSO
dbsplit(1)

.SH AUTHOR
Written by Curt Hash.
