.TH JSONSORT 1 "November 2014" "db Manual" "db Manual"

.SH NAME
jsonsort \- Sort JSON records using *nix sort

.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBjsonsort\fR [\fIOPTION\fR]... --files-from \fIPATH\fR -- [\fISORT_ARGS\fR]
.br
\fBjsonsort\fR [\fIOPTION\fR]... -- \fIPATH\fR [\fIPATH\fR]...
[\fISORT_ARGS\fR]
.br
\fBjsonsort\fR [\fIOPTION\fR]... -- [\fISORT_ARGS\fR]

.SH SUMMARY
\fBjsonsort\fR uses *nix sort to sort JSON data records. Input data files can
be read from a file, provided as arguments or JSON data records can be piped
directly to stdin. Input data files can be uncompressed, gzip compressed data,
bzip2 compressed data or 7-zip archive data. Sorted JSON data records are
written to stdout.

.SH JSONPATH
Sort keys are specified using one or more JSONPath expressions. For detailed
information about JSONPath, see https://www.npmjs.org/package/JSONPath.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
\fBSORT_ARGS\fR
Additional options to sort. For example, \fB--parallel\fR=\fIINTEGER\fR. See
sort(1).
.TP
\fBPATH\fR
Specify the path of a file to sort. Note that files specified on the command
line must follow the double dash (--) like \fBSORT_ARGS\fR.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
Output usage and exit.
.TP
\fB\-k\fR, \fB\-\-key\fR \fIJSONPATH[+[OPTIONS]]\fR
Evaluate the JSONPath expression \fIJSONPATH\fR on each record and sort by the
resulting values. Additional sort \fIOPTIONS\fR (e.g., \(lqr\(rq for reverse)
can be specified using a plus followed by the option letter(s). There is no
need to specify numeric sort options like \(lqg\(rq and \(lqn\(rq; these
options are added automatically based on the result type. This option can be
used multiple times to sort by multiple values. Note that additional sort
options will likely not behave correctly if the JSONPath expression returns a
list or object. See sort(1).
.TP
\fB\-\-files-from\fR \fIPATH\fR
Read a list of input files from \fIPATH\fR. If \fIPATH\fR is equal to
\(lq-\(rq, the list of input files will be read from stdin.

.SH EXAMPLES
.P
.B jsonsort

Read records from stdin and sort them.

.P
.B echo -e \(dqfoo.gz\\\\nbar.gz\(dq | jsonsort --files-from -
.br
.B jsonsort -- foo.gz bar.gz

Uncompress and sort the contents of \(lqfoo.gz\(rq and \(lqbar.gz\(rq.

.P
.B jsonsort --files-from sort_files.txt

Sort the contents of the files listed in \(lqsort_files.txt\(rq.

.P
.B jsonsort -k $.ip

Sort records by the top-level \fBip\fR field.

.P
.B jsonsort -k $.ip+r

Sort records by the top-level \fBip\fR field in reverse order.

.P
.B jsonsort -k $.sip -k $.dip

Sort records by the top-level \fBsip\fR and \fBdip\fR fields.

.P
.B jsonsort -k $.ip -- -s --parallel=48 -S48G

Sort records by the top-level \fBip\fR field. Additionally, stabilize the sort,
run 48 sorts concurrently and use up to 48 gigabytes of main memory.

.SH SEE ALSO
sort(1), dbsort(1)

.SH AUTHOR
Written by Curt Hash.
